Document I18n 1.0 (#431)
grammyjs/website: site/docs/plugins/i18n.md

# Internationalization

> When you need to target a multi-language audience with your bot, you're going to need internationalization.
> grammY's i18n plugin can help you add multiple languages to your bot as easily as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you are targeting an international audience with your bot, you will want to internationalize your bot by making it multilingual.
The i18n plugin helps in this process and lets you internationalize your bot.
```

> The i18n plugin is built on top of [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/).
> Fluent is a localization system for natural-sounding translations made by the Mozilla Foundation.
> It has a very powerful and elegant syntax that lets anyone write efficient and fully understandable translations.
> This plugin takes advantage of this amazing localization system to make bots powered by grammY fluent with high-quality translations.

Reviewer: Two sentences are fine.

```suggestion
The i18n plugin is based on the [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/)—a localization system supported by Mozilla.
It has a very powerful and elegant syntax that lets anyone write efficient and natural-sounding translations.
```

Or even better, if your bot has a command for changing the language, it is better to use the language which the user has selected.
Based on these different language selection approaches, the i18n plugin can be configured mainly in two different ways: [With](#with-sessions) or [Without sessions](#without-sessions).

Continue reading to find out which is best for your use case.

### Without Sessions

This is easier to set up and use than using with sessions.
But this will not directly allow you to control the language selection.
(Though technically, you can just implement a [custom locale negotiator](#custom-locale-negotiation) to achieve that).

The locale for the user is selected from `ctx.from.language_code`, which is the language code of the user.
But if you don't have a translation of that language, the default language will be used.

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="TypeScript" active>

```ts
import { Bot, Context } from "grammy";
import { I18n, I18nContextFlavor } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

// For full TypeScript support and proper auto-completion
// extend the Context with I18n's Context Flavor.
type MyContext = Context & I18nContextFlavor;

> // Create a bot as you would normally do. But
> // remember to use the extended Context like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create a bot as you normally would.
// Remember to extend the context.
```

const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

// Create an I18n instance. Continue reading
// to find out how to configure the instance.
const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en", // See below for more information.

>   // Load all translation files from the `locales` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Load all translation files from locales/.
```

  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!
bot.use(i18n.middleware());

> // Everything is set up now. You can access translations
> // with the `t` or `translate` methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with `t` or `translate`.
```

bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start-msg"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="JavaScript">

```js
const { Bot } = require("grammy");
const { I18n } = require("@grammyjs/i18n");

> // Create a bot as you would normally do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create a bot as you normally would.
```

const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

// Create an I18n instance. Continue reading
// to find out how to configure the instance.
const i18n = new I18n({

>   defaultLocale: "en", // See below for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  defaultLocale: "en", // see below for more information
```

>   // Load all translation files from the `locales` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Load all translation files from locales/.
```

  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!
bot.use(i18n.middleware());

> // Everything is set up now. You can access translations
> // with the `t` or `translate` methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with one of the `t` or `translate` methods.
```

bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start-msg"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="Deno">

```ts
import { Bot, Context } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
import {
  I18n,
  I18nContextFlavor,
} from "https://deno.land/x/grammy_i18n/mod.ts";

> // For full TypeScript support and proper auto-completion
> // extend the Context with I18n's Context Flavor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// For TypeScript and auto-completion support,
// extend the context with I18n's flavor:
```

type MyContext = Context & I18nContextFlavor;

> // Create a bot as you would normally do. But
> // remember to use the extended Context like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create a bot as you would normally do.
// Remember to use the extended context.
```

const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

> // Create an I18n instance. Continue reading
> // to find out how to configure the instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Create an `I18n` instance.
// Continue reading to find out how to configure the instance.
```

const i18n = new I18n({

>   defaultLocale: "en", // See below for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  defaultLocale: "en", // see below for more information
```

>   // Load all translation files from the `locales` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // Load all translation files from locales/.
```

  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!
bot.use(i18n);

> // Everything is set up now. You can access translations
> // with the `t` or `translate` methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with the `t` or `translate` methods.
```

# Internationalization

When you need to target a multi-language audience with your bot, you're going to need internationalization.
grammY's i18n plugin can help you to get that done as easily as possible.

The i18n plugin is built on top of [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/).
Fluent is a localization system made by Mozilla Foundation for natural-sounding translations.
It has a very powerful and elegant syntax that lets anyone write efficient and fully-understandable translations.

> This plugin takes advantage of this amazing localization system to make bots powered by grammY fluent with high-quality translations.

Author: That was taken from fluent's docs 😄 So thanks to @slavafomin.

help = 
    Send me some text and I can make it bold for you.
    You can also change my language using the /language command.
```

`ru.ftl`

```fluent
start = (RU) Hi, how can I /help you?
help = 
    (RU) Send me a text message. I can make it bold for you.
    You can also change my language using the /language command.
```

and here is how you can show them to the user:

```ts
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start"));
});

bot.command("help", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("help"));
});
```

When is received, the best possible translation is selected for the user.
So as a result, different users with different languages will be able to read the messages in their languages.

## Usage

Assuming that you have set up translations, let's see how we can effectively use them in our bot.

For the best possible language experience for the user, a perfect locale (translation) should be selected before sending a message.
Maybe it is better to show the user from the `language_code` we receive from Telegram updates.
Or even better, if your bot has a command for changing the language, it is better to use the language which the user has selected.

> Based on these different language selection approaches, the i18n plugin can be configured mainly in two different ways: [With](#with-sessions) or [Without sessions](#without-sessions).

Author: I am not sure, but I think maybe `with or without sessions` is better(?). Leaving it to you two.

> Based on these different language selection approaches, the i18n plugin can be configured mainly in two different ways: [With](#with-sessions) or [Without sessions](#without-sessions).

Author: @roj1512 final decision?

> Based on these different language selection approaches, the i18n plugin can be configured mainly in two different ways: [With](#with-sessions) or [Without sessions](#without-sessions).

Reviewer: With or without

To let your i18n instance know that sessions are enabled, you have to set `useSession` to `true` in the i18n options.

Here is an example of implementing it, including a simple `/language` command:

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="TypeScript" active>

```ts
import { Bot, Context, session, SessionFlavor } from "grammy";
import { I18n, I18nContextFlavor } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

interface SessionData {
  __language_code?: string;
}

type MyContext =
  & Context
  & SessionFlavor<SessionData>
  & I18nContextFlavor;

const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en",
  useSession: true, // whether get/set in session

  // Load locales from the `locales` directory.
  directory: "locales",
});

const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here

// Remember to register `session` middleware before
// registering middleware of the i18n instance.
bot.use(session({
  initial: () => {
    return {};
  },
}));

// Register i18n middleware
bot.use(i18n.middleware());

bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("greeting"));
});

bot.command("language", async (ctx) => {

>   if (ctx.match === "") {

Author: I remember once testing it. I'll try once again and make sure it works. And maybe add a test for user language changing in i18n.

>   if (ctx.match === "") {

Author: It works. And I've added a test for it: [grammyjs/i18n@`891c85c` (#20)](https://github.com/grammyjs/i18n/pull/20/commits/891c85cabe2e8ae54342206b864bece97172d434)

Instead, it only updates the session.
The changes will only take place in the next update.

But you cannot always wait until the next update, you might need to refresh the changes just after updating the user language.
That is why the `renegotiateLocale` method exists.

Now if we do this

```ts
ctx.session.__language_code = "ru";
await ctx.i18n.renegotiateLocale();
```

anyplace we use the method `t`, the bot will try to reply with the Russian (`ru`) translation of that message.

Also remember, when you use built-in sessions, you can achieve the same result using the `setLocale` method.

:::

::: tip Setting locale when not using sessions

When [not using sessions](#without-sessions), if there is a case where you need to set the locale for a user, you can do that by using the `useLocale` method.

```ts
await ctx.i18n.useLocale("it");
```

It sets the specified locale to be used for future translations.
The effect lasts only for the duration of the current update and is not preserved.
Could be used to change the translation locale in the middle of the update (e.g. when the user changes the language).

:::

## Custom Locale Negotiation

> Well, we saw configuring the i18n instance with or without sessions.

Author: Thanks. Should I also link to the sections? (with or without sessions)

> Well, we saw configuring the i18n instance with or without sessions.

Reviewer 2: Sure, that would be good

Here is how they choose the most appropriate language for the user:

1. If sessions are enabled, try to read `__language_code` from the session.
   If it returns a valid locale, it is used.
   If it returns nothing or a non-registered locale, move on to the second option.
2. Tries to read from `ctx.from.language_code`.
   If it returns a locale that is not registered in the i18n instance move on to 3rd option.
   Otherwise, it is used.

   If you didn't know before, the `ctx.from.language_code` is only available if the user has started the bot.

>    That means if the bot sees the user in a group or somewhere without the user previously starting it, it won't be able to see `ctx.from.language_code`.

Author: Thanks to @roj1512 for that.

Source: https://t.me/grammyjs/59266

    "en";
}

const i18n = new I18n({
  localeNegotiator: myLocaleNegotiator,
});
```

If the custom locale negotiator returns an invalid locale, it will fall back and choose a locale with the above order.

## Render Translated Messages

Let's take a closer look at rendering messages.

```ts
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  // Call the "translate" or "t" helper to render the
  // message by specifying its ID and additional parameters:
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("welcome"));
});

bot.command("cart", async (ctx) => {
  // You can pass placeables as the second object.
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("cart-msg", {
    items: 10,
  }));
});
```

Now you can `/start` your bot, it should render the following message:

```:no-line-numbers
Hi there!
```

Now, with the `/cart` command:

```:no-line-numbers
You currently have 10 items in your cart.
```

Try to change the value of the `items` variable to see how the rendered message would change!
Consider following the [placeables official documentation](https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/placeables.html) to find more about them.

## Adding Translations

There are several methods to add translations to the plugin.

> ### Load locales using `directory` option

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Load Locales Using the `directory` Option
```

The simplest way to add translations to the i18n instance is by having all of your translations in a directory and specifying them in the i18n options.

```ts
const i18n = new I18n({
  directory: "locales",
});
```

> ### Load locales from a directory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Loading Locales From a Directory
```

This is the same thing as specifying `directory` in options.
Just put them all in a folder and load them like this:

```ts
i18n.loadLocalesDir("locales");
```

> ### Load a single locale

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Loading a Single Locale
```

# Internationalization

> The i18n plugin helps you with providing multiple languages for your bot. It does this by loading translation files from directory or directly.

Reviewer 3: its explained later, but I rephrase it. I thought about saying inline, or in code. But all these are unprecise, as you said. I edited it to 
` It does this by loading translation files from a directory or directly by providing the string via the loadLocale methods source option.`

> The i18n plugin helps you with providing multiple languages for your bot. It does this by loading translation files from directory or directly.

Reviewer 2: Nice, please push your changes.

> The plugin is based on [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/)—a localization framework supported by Mozilla.

Reviewer 3: should we?  I added it

> The plugin is based on [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/)—a localization framework supported by Mozilla.

Reviewer 2: Please push your changes, I don't see that link.

These translation files contain translations like this:

`en.ftl`

```fluent
start = Hi, how can I /help you?
help = 
    Send me some text and I can make it bold for you.
    You can change my language using the /language command.
```

`de.ftl`

```fluent
start = Hallo, wie kann ich dir helfen? /help
help = 
    Schick eine Textnachricht, die ich für dich fett schreiben soll.
    Du kannst mit dem Befehl /language die Spache ändern.
```

Using the translations in your bot:

```ts
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start"));
});

bot.command("help", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("help"));
});
```

Whenever a message is sent the locale of context is used. This could be your specific language negotiator or just `ctx.from.language_code`
So as a result different users with different locales will be able to read the messages in their languages.

## Usage

The plugin chooses the language in use by different ways. One of them is the default `ctx.from.language_code` provided by the telegram client of the user.
If your bot has a command for changing the language it is better to use the language chosen by the user.

> Based on these different language selection approaches the i18n plugin can be configured mainly in two different ways: [With sessions](#with-sessions) or [Without sessions](#without-sessions).

Reviewer 2: I like how this was improved, but I still see some potential here to express this idea in a more structured way. We effectively mean is that the language is determined by different factors, and one of these factors is whether we have access to sessions. Hence, there are two ways to use the plugin. LMK if you don't see a way yourself how this can be improved, I can offer to rephrase this paragraph.

Though technically, you can just implement a [custom locale negotiator](#custom-locale-negotiation) to achieve that.

The locale for the user is selected from `ctx.from.language_code`, which is provided by the telegram client of the user.
But if you don't have a translation of that language, the default language will be used.

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="TypeScript" active>

```ts
import { Bot, Context } from "grammy";
import { I18n, I18nContextFlavor } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

// For full TypeScript support and proper auto-completion
// extend the Context with I18n's Context Flavor.
type MyContext = Context & I18nContextFlavor;

// Create a bot as you normally would.
// Remember to extend the context.
const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

// Create an `I18n` instance.
// Continue reading to find out how to configure the instance.
const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en", // see below for more information

  // Load all translation files from locales/.
  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!

> bot.use(i18n.middleware());

Reviewer 2: I have asked this before but I don't remember—why is this preferred over `bot.use(i18n)`?

Author: Sorry about that. iirc, you asked about this, but that wasn't working back then because there were some type issues. So, I managed to make it work in the plugin code, but forgot to update here. Anyway, I've udpated them now :) Thanks for the reminder.

});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="Deno">

```ts
import { Bot, Context } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
import {
  I18n,
  I18nContextFlavor,
} from "https://deno.land/x/grammy_i18n/mod.ts";

// For TypeScript and auto-completion support,
// extend the context with I18n's flavor:
type MyContext = Context & I18nContextFlavor;

// Create a bot as you normally would.
// Remember to extend the context.
const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

// Create an `I18n` instance.
// Continue reading to find out how to configure the instance.
const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en", // see below for more information

  // Load all translation files from locales/.
  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!
bot.use(i18n);

// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with `t` or `translate`.
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start-msg"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
</CodeGroup>

`ctx.t` returns the translated message for the specified key.
You don't have to worry about languages here.

> Your bot is a polyglot :tada:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Congratulations!
Your bot is now a polyglot! :tada:
```

Reviewer 3: I really don't like congratulating or anything like this in doc. Its a doc, not a tutorial.

Reviewer 2: Actually, most of the time, it's both. Here, we try to explain the concepts in an understandable way, and get people up to speed. The plain API reference is elsewhere.

Can you elaborate on your reason for disliking this, beyond saying that you do?

Reviewer 3: for me its useless, its also not helping flow but bloating the text and making visibility of important info harder.

    return {};
  },
}));

// Register i18n middleware
bot.use(i18n.middleware());

bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("greeting"));
});

bot.command("language", async (ctx) => {
  if (ctx.match === "") {
    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.specify-a-locale"));
  }

  // `i18n.locales` contains all the locales that have been registered
  if (!i18n.locales.includes(ctx.match)) {
    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.invalid-locale"));
  }

  // `ctx.i18n.getLocale` returns the locale currently using.
  if (await ctx.i18n.getLocale() === ctx.match) {
    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.already-set"));
  }

  await ctx.i18n.setLocale(ctx.match);
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.language-set"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="Deno">

```ts
import {
  Bot,
  Context,
  session,
  SessionFlavor,
} from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
import {
  I18n,
  I18nContextFlavor,
} from "https://deno.land/x/grammy_i18n/mod.ts";

interface SessionData {
  __language_code?: string;
}

type MyContext =
  & Context
  & SessionFlavor<SessionData>
  & I18nContextFlavor;

const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en",

>   useSession: true, // whether get/set in session

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  useSession: true, // whether to store user language in session
```

Reviewer 3: thats a good example of wording it less technical but not tutorial like :)

Reviewer 2: What problem do you even have with tutorials? We have loads of them on this website, Getting Started is probably the most famous one.

Reviewer 3: So should this be more like tutorial and the api doc the core doc?

Reviewer 2: I don't know what difference there is between docs and tutorials from your point of view.

### Functions

Functions are like placeables. But unlike placables, functions get executed and replaced by the value it returns in the final output.

#### `CTX`

This function can help you to access any properties of the bot context directly from your translations.

```fluent:no-line-numbers
id = Your user ID: { CTX("from.id") }
```

The `CTX("from.id")` will get replaced by `ctx.from.id`.

Optionally, you can pass in a default value as the second argument.
If the value is undefined, the default value is used instead.

```fluent:no-line-numbers
id = Last name: { CTX("from.last_name", "You don't have a last name.") }
```

## Listening for Translated Text

We managed to send translated texts to the user.
Now imagine, what if the user sends the bot a text?
Yes, we use the `bot.hears` to handle them.
But, what if the user sends a translated version of the text we're trying to listen to?
This plugin also makes this part easy for you.

```ts
bot.hears("Hello", async (ctx) => {
  // handle update
});
bot.hears("Hallo", async (ctx) => {
  // handle update
});
```

If those handlers are the same, we could do this:

```ts
bot.hears(["Hello", "Hallo"], async (ctx) => {
  // handle update

> });

Reviewer 2: This needs to be adjusted to `hears`. Also check if the rest of this subsection needs to be touched accordingly.

Author: I've tried my best on explaining this stuff short and simple as possible. Needs your review and suggestions.

```

But, it is kind of hard to list out all the translations to listen for.
With the `t` method from the i18n instance, you can do this:

```ts
bot.hears(i18n.t("welcome-text"), async (ctx) => {
  // handle update
});
```

::: warning

Make sure to load all of the translations before using this method.
Otherwise, you cannot listen to all of the translations.

:::

## Further Steps

- Complete reading the [Fluent documentation](https://projectfluent.org/), especially the [syntax guide](https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/).

> - Check out proper [examples](https://github.com/grammyjs/i18n/tree/main/examples) for Deno and Node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Check out proper [examples](https://github.com/grammyjs/i18n/tree/main/examples) of this plugin for Deno and Node.
```

Reviewer 3: unneeded? but I added it. I feel like the people now which doc they are looking at ;)

Reviewer 2: Where did you add it? I also don't see these changes, so please push.

Reviewer 3: its pushed, I did first go through all comments

Reviewer 2: It does not look like you actually added this. I will do it now since you approved of it.

  source: `greeting = Hallo { $first_name }!
language-set = Die Sprache wurde zu Deutsch geändert!`,
});
```

## Listening for Localized Text

We managed to send localized messages to the user.
Now, let's take a look at how to listen for messages sent by the user.
In grammY, we usually use the `bot.hears` handler for listening to incoming messages.
But since we've been talking about internationalization, in this section we will see how to listen for localized incoming messages.

This feature comes in handy when your bot has [custom keyboards](./keyboard.md#custom-keyboards) containing localized text.

Here is a short example of listening to a localized text message sent using a custom keyboard.
Instead of using `bot.hears` handler, we use `bot.filter` combined with the `hears` middleware provided by this plugin.

<CodeGroup>
 <CodeGroupItem title="TypeScript">

```ts
import { hears } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

bot.filter(hears("back-to-menu-btn"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("main-menu-msg");
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="JavaScript">

```ts
const { hears } = require("@grammyjs/i18n");

bot.filter(hears("back-to-menu-btn"), async (ctx) => {

>   await ctx.reply("main-menu-msg");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("main-menu-msg"));
```

# Internationalization (`i18n`)

> The internationalization plugin helps you write a bot that can speak multiple languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The internationalization plugin makes your bot speak multiple languages.
```

> ## Internationalization Explained

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Internationalization
```

> > This part explains what internationalization is, why it's needed, what is complicated about it, how it relates to localization, and why you need a plugin for all of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This section explains what internationalization is, why it is needed, what is complicated about it, how it relates to localization, and why you need a plugin for all of this.
```

> > If you already know these things, scroll down to [get started](#getting-started).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you think you are already fine with these, scroll right to [Getting Started](#getting-started).
```

> First, internationalization is a very long word, so people like to write the first letter (i) and the last letter (n).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, internationalization is a very long word, hence people like to write the first letter (i) and the last letter (n).
```

They then count all remaining letters (nternationalizatio, 18 letters) and put this number between i and the n, so they end up with _i18n_.
Don't ask us why.
So i18n is just a weird abbreviation of the word internationalization.

The same is done to localization, which turns into _l10n_.

> ### What Is Localization?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Localization
```

Localization means creating a bot that can speak multiple languages.
It should automatically adjust its language to the language of the user.

There are more things to localize than the language.
You can also account for cultural differences or other standards, such as the date and time formats.
Here are a few more examples of things that are represented differently across the globe:

1. Dates
2. Times
3. Numbers
4. Units
5. Pluralization
6. Genders
7. Hyphenation
8. Capitalization
9. Alignment
10. Symbols and icons
11. Sorting

… and [a lot more](https://youtu.be/0j74jcxSunY).

All of these things collectively define the _locale_ of a user.
Locales often get two-letter codes, such as `en` for English, `de` for German, and so on.

### What Is Internationalization?

> In a nutshell, doing internationalization means writing code that can adjust to a user's locale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a nutshell, internationalization means writing code that can adjust to a user's locale.
```

In other words, internationalization is what enables localization (see [above](#what-is-localization)).
This means that while your bot fundamentally works the same way for everybody, the exact messages it sends vary from user to user, so the bot can speak different languages.

You are doing internationalization if you don't hard-code the texts your bot sends but instead read them from a file dynamically.

> If you don't hard-code how dates and times are represented but instead use a library that adjusts these values to different standards, you are doing internationalization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't hard-code how dates and times are represented but instead use a library that adjusts these values according to different standards, you are doing internationalization.
```

Reviewer 3: Hi, the comma before and isn't correct; or am i wrong

> You get the idea: don't hard-code stuff that should change based on where the user lives or the language they speak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You get the idea: Don't hard-code stuff that should change based on where the user lives or the language they speak.
```

### Why Do You Need This Plugin?

> This plugin can assist you with your internationalization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plugin can assist you throughout your internationalization process.
```

> It is based on [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/)—an excellent localization system built by [Mozilla](https://mozilla.org/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is based on [Fluent](https://projectfluent.org/)—a localization system built by [Mozilla](https://mozilla.org/).
```

> This system has a very powerful and elegant syntax that lets you write natural-sounding translations efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This system has a very powerful and elegant syntax that lets you write natural-sounding translations in an efficient way.
```

In essence, you can extract the things that should adjust based on the user's locale to some text files that you put next to your code.
You can then use this plugin to load these localizations.

> The plugin will automatically determine the user's locale and make your bot speak the correct language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin will automatically determine the user's locale and let your bot choose the right language to speak.
```

> In the following, we will call these text files _translation files_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below, we will call these text files _translation files_.
```

> They need to follow the syntax of Fluent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are required to follow Fluent's syntax.
```

## Getting Started

> This section describes setting up your project structure and where to put your translation files.
> If you are familiar with this, [skip ahead](#usage) to see how to install and use the plugin.

There are [multiple ways](#adding-translations) to add more languages to your bot.
The easiest way is to create a folder with your Fluent translation files.
Usually, the name of that folder is going to be `locales/`.
The translation files should have the extension `.ftl` (fluent).

Here is an example project structure:

```asciiart:no-line-numbers
.
├── bot.ts
└── locales/
    ├── de.ftl
    ├── en.ftl
    ├── it.ftl
    └── ru.ftl
```

> If you're unfamiliar with the Fluent file (`.ftl`) syntax, you can have a look at their syntax guide here: <https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're unfamiliar with the Fluent's syntax, you can read their guide: <https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide>
```

Here is an example translation file for English, called `locales/en.ftl`:

```fluent
start = Hi, how can I /help you?
help = 
    Send me some text, and I can make it bold for you.
    You can change my language using the /language command.
```

The German equivalent would be called `locales/de.ftl` and look like this:

```fluent
start = Hallo, wie kann ich dir helfen? /help
help = 
    Schick eine Textnachricht, die ich für dich fett schreiben soll.
    Du kannst mit dem Befehl /language die Spache ändern.
```

> In your bot, you can now use these translations through this plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your bot, you can now use these translations through the plugin.
```

It will make them available through `ctx.t`:

```ts
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start"));
});

bot.command("help", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("help"));
});
```

Whenever you call `ctx.t`, the locale of the current context object `ctx` is used to find the proper translation.

> Finding the proper translation is done using a function called _locale negotiator_.

Reviewer: Can a function be called that?

Reviewer: Idk. But can a function be called "language negotiator"?

Reviewer 3: I can't today

Reviewer: Np. Have fun.

Reviewer 2: It should be called `localeNegotiator` anyway. It negotiates the locale, not the language. That's also what the docs explain btw. @dcdunkan do you want to fix this?

Author: It is already called `localeNegotiator` actually. I don't know if someone changed it while I was unavailable.

In the simplest case, it just returns `ctx.from.language_code`.

> As a result, different users with different locales will be able to read the messages, each in their language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, users with different locales will be able to read the messages, each in their language.
```

## Usage

The plugin derives the user's locale from many different factors.

> One of them is the value of `ctx.from.language_code` provided by the Telegram client of the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of them is the value of `ctx.from.language_code` provided by the user's client.
```

> However, there are many more things that can be used to determine the locale of the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are many more things that can be used to determine the user's locale.
```

For example, you could store the user's locale in your [session](./session.md).
Hence, there are two main ways to use this plugin: [with sessions](#with-sessions) or [without sessions](#without-sessions).

### Without Sessions

It's easier to use and set up the plugin without sessions.

> Its main drawback is that you can’t save the user's chosen language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its main drawback is that you can't store the language the users choose.
```

The locale for the user is selected based on `ctx.from.language_code`, which is provided by the Telegram client of the user.

> But the default language will be used if you don't have a translation of that language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But the default language will be used if you don't have a translation of that language.
Sometimes your bot might not be able to see the user's preferred language provided by their client, and in that case the default language will be used, too.
The `ctx.from.language_code` will be visible only if the user previously has started a private conversation with your bot.
```

// For TypeScript and auto-completion support,
// extend the context with I18n's flavor:
type MyContext = Context & I18nFlavor;

// Create a bot as you normally would.
// Remember to extend the context.
const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

// Create an `I18n` instance.
// Continue reading to find out how to configure the instance.
const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en", // see below for more information

  // Load all translation files from locales/.
  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!
bot.use(i18n);

// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with `t` or `translate`.
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start-msg"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
</CodeGroup>

`ctx.t` returns the translated message for the specified key.
You don't have to worry about languages, as they will be picked automatically by the plugin.

Congratulations!
Your bot now speaks multiple languages! :earth_africa::tada:

### With Sessions

Let's assume that your bot has a `/language` command.

> Generally, in grammY, we can use [sessions](./session.md) to store user data per chat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, in grammY we can use [sessions](./session.md) to store user data per chat.
```

To let your internationalization instance know that sessions are enabled, you have to set `useSession` to `true` in the options of `I18n`.

> Here is an example, including a simple `/language` command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example including a simple `/language` command:
```

bot.command("language", async (ctx) => {
  if (ctx.match === "") {
    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.specify-a-locale"));
  }

  // `i18n.locales` contains all the locales that have been registered
  if (!i18n.locales.includes(ctx.match)) {
    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.invalid-locale"));
  }

  // `ctx.i18n.getLocale` returns the locale currently using.
  if (await ctx.i18n.getLocale() === ctx.match) {
    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.already-set"));
  }

  await ctx.i18n.setLocale(ctx.match);
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.language-set"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="Deno">

```ts
import {
  Bot,
  Context,
  session,
  SessionFlavor,
} from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
import { I18n, I18nFlavor } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy_i18n/mod.ts";

interface SessionData {
  __language_code?: string;
}

type MyContext =
  & Context
  & SessionFlavor<SessionData>
  & I18nFlavor;

const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en",
  useSession: true, // whether get/set in session

  // Load locales from the `locales` directory.
  directory: "locales",
});

const bot = new Bot<MyContext>(""); // <-- put your bot token here

> // Remember to register `session` middleware before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Remember to register `session` before
```

> // Remember to register `session` middleware before
> // registering middleware of the i18n instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Remember to do this before registering the i18n middleware.
```

```

## Listening for Localized Text

We managed to send localized messages to the user.
Now let's take a look at how to listen for messages sent by the user.
In grammY, we usually use the `bot.hears` handler for listening to incoming messages.
But since we've been talking about internationalization, in this section we will see how to listen for localized incoming messages.

This feature come in handy when your bot has [custom keyboards](./keyboard.md#custom-keyboards) containing localized text.

Here is a short example of listening to a localized text message sent using a custom keyboard.
Instead of using `bot.hears` handler, we use `bot.filter` combined with the `hears` middleware provided by this plugin.

```ts
import { hears } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

bot.filter(hears("back-to-menu-btn"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("main-menu-msg");
});
```

The `hears` middleware makes sure that the message the bot is listening for, is written in the same locale of the user.

## Further Steps

- Complete reading the [Fluent documentation](https://projectfluent.org/), especially the [syntax guide](https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/).

> - Check out proper [examples](https://github.com/grammyjs/i18n/tree/main/examples) of this plugin for Deno and Node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check out proper [examples](https://github.com/grammyjs/i18n/tree/main/examples) of this plugin for Deno and Node.js.
```

# Internationalization (`i18n`)

The internationalization plugin makes your bot speak multiple languages.

## Internationalization Explained

> This section explains what internationalization is, why it is needed, what is complicated about it, how it relates to localization, and why you need a plugin for all of this.

> > If you think you are already fine with these, scroll right to [Getting Started](#getting-started).

Reviewer 2: AFAIK _to be fine with sth_ does not mean knowing something, but rather accepting something.

Author: Should I revert it back to

> If you already know these things, scroll down to [get started](#getting-started).

Reviewer 2: Reverting would work, rephrasing to something correct would also work. I'm fine with this either way.

Author: I'll revert it because I can't find anything better.

> First, internationalization is a very long word, hence people like to write the first letter (i) and the last letter (n).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, internationalization is a very long word, hence, people like to write the first letter (i) and the last letter (n).
```
or even
```suggestion
First, internationalization is a very long word.
Hence, people like to write the first letter (i) and the last letter (n).
```

There are more things to localize than the language.
You can also account for cultural differences or other standards, such as the date and time formats.
Here are a few more examples of things that are represented differently across the globe:

1. Dates
2. Times
3. Numbers
4. Units
5. Pluralization
6. Genders
7. Hyphenation
8. Capitalization
9. Alignment
10. Symbols and icons
11. Sorting

… and [a lot more](https://youtu.be/0j74jcxSunY).

All of these things collectively define the _locale_ of a user.
Locales often get two-letter codes, such as `en` for English, `de` for German, and so on.

### What Is Internationalization?

In a nutshell, internationalization means writing code that can adjust to a user's locale.
In other words, internationalization is what enables localization (see [above](#what-is-localization)).
This means that while your bot fundamentally works the same way for everybody, the exact messages it sends vary from user to user, so the bot can speak different languages.

You are doing internationalization if you don't hard-code the texts your bot sends but instead read them from a file dynamically.

> If you don't hard-code how dates and times are represented, and instead use a library that adjusts these values according to different standards, you are doing internationalization.

Reviewer 2: This was meant to be an anaphora.
```suggestion
You are doing internationalization if you don't hard-code how dates and times are represented, and instead use a library that adjusts these values according to different standards.
```

This system has a very powerful and elegant syntax that lets you write natural-sounding translations in an efficient way.

In essence, you can extract the things that should adjust based on the user's locale to some text files that you put next to your code.
You can then use this plugin to load these localizations.
The plugin will automatically determine the user's locale and let your bot choose the right language to speak.

Below, we will call these text files _translation files_.
They are required to follow Fluent's syntax.

## Getting Started

> This section describes setting up your project structure and where to put your translation files.
> If you are familiar with this, [skip ahead](#usage) to see how to install and use the plugin.

There are [multiple ways](#adding-translations) to add more languages to your bot.
The easiest way is to create a folder with your Fluent translation files.
Usually, the name of that folder is going to be `locales/`.
The translation files should have the extension `.ftl` (fluent).

Here is an example project structure:

```asciiart:no-line-numbers
.
├── bot.ts
└── locales/
    ├── de.ftl
    ├── en.ftl
    ├── it.ftl
    └── ru.ftl
```

> If you're unfamiliar with the Fluent's syntax, you can read their guide: <https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're unfamiliar with Fluent's syntax, you can read their guide: <https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide>
```

Here is an example translation file for English, called `locales/en.ftl`:

```fluent
start = Hi, how can I /help you?
help = 
    Send me some text, and I can make it bold for you.
    You can change my language using the /language command.
```

The German equivalent would be called `locales/de.ftl` and look like this:

```fluent
start = Hallo, wie kann ich dir helfen? /help
help = 
    Schick eine Textnachricht, die ich für dich fett schreiben soll.
    Du kannst mit dem Befehl /language die Spache ändern.
```

In your bot, you can now use these translations through the plugin.
It will make them available through `ctx.t`:

```ts
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start"));
});

bot.command("help", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("help"));
});
```

Whenever you call `ctx.t`, the locale of the current context object `ctx` is used to find the proper translation.

> Finding the proper translation is done using a function called _localeNegotiator_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finding the proper translation is done using a function called `localeNegotiator`.
```
or
```suggestion
Finding the proper translation is done using a function called _locale negotiator_.
```
or even
```suggestion
Finding the proper translation is done using a _locale negotiator_.
```

Author: The third one seems better to me.

Reviewer: You can commit it.

In the simplest case, it just returns `ctx.from.language_code`.

As a result, users with different locales will be able to read the messages, each in their language.

## Usage

The plugin derives the user's locale from many different factors.
One of them is from `ctx.from.language_code`, which will be provided by the user's client.

However, there are many more things that can be used to determine the user's locale.
For example, you could store the user's locale in your [session](./session.md).
Hence, there are two main ways to use this plugin: [With Sessions](#with-sessions) and [Without Sessions](#without-sessions).

### Without Sessions

It's easier to use and set up the plugin without sessions.
Its main drawback is that you can't store the languages the users choose.

Like mentioned above, the locale to be used for the user will be decided with `ctx.from.language_code`, which is coming from the user's client.
But the default language will be used if you don't have a translation of that language.
Sometimes your bot might not be able to see the user's preferred language provided by their client, and in that case the default language will be used, too.

> The `ctx.from.language_code` will be visible only if the user previously has started a private conversation with your bot.

Reviewer 2: Emphasize?
```suggestion

**The `ctx.from.language_code` will be visible only if the user previously has started a private conversation with your bot.**
```

<CodeGroup>
  <CodeGroupItem title="TypeScript" active>

```ts

> import { Bot, Context } from "grammy";
> import { I18n, I18nFlavor } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

Reviewer 2: Should we encourage users to do this? Is this good practice? Is this irrelevant and confusing?
```suggestion
import { Bot, type Context } from "grammy";
import { I18n, type I18nFlavor } from "@grammyjs/i18n";
```
If you apply this suggestion, please adjust the remaining code snippets, too.

Author: For me, its not irrelevant and confusing. But I didn't include them because, I was focusing on simple examples - minimal as possible. And, I didn't find other pages having explicit type imports (example: session, router, etc). So, to be consistent with the rest of the documentation I think we shouldn't be doing this here.

    return await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.already-set"));
  }

  await ctx.i18n.setLocale(ctx.match);
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("language.language-set"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
</CodeGroup>

When sessions are enabled, the `__language_code` property in the session will be used instead of `ctx.from.language_code` (provided by the Telegram client) during language selection.
When your bot sends messages, the locale is selected from `ctx.session.__language_code`.

There is a `setLocale` method that you can use to set the desired language.
It will save this value in your session.

```ts
await ctx.i18n.setLocale("de");
```

This is equivalent to manually setting it in session, and then renegotiating the locale:

```ts
ctx.session.__language_code = "de";
await ctx.i18n.renegotiateLocale();
```

::: tip Renegotiating the Locale

When you are using sessions or something else---apart from `ctx.from.language_code`---for selecting a custom locale for the user, there are some situations where you might change the language while handling an update.
For instance, take a look at the above example using sessions.

When you only do

```ts:no-line-numbers
ctx.session.__language_code = "de";
```

> It will not update the currently used locale in the i18n instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it will not update the currently used locale in the `I18n` instance.
```

Instead, it only updates the session.
Thus, the changes will only take place _for the next update_.

If you cannot wait until the next update, you might need to refresh the changes after updating the user language.
Use the `renegotiateLocale` method for these cases.

```ts
ctx.session.__language_code = "de";
await ctx.i18n.renegotiateLocale();
```

> Anyplace we use the method `t`, the bot will try to reply with the German translation of that message (specified in `locales/de.ftl`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Afterwards, whenever we use the method `t`, the bot will try to reply with the German translation of that message (specified in `locales/de.ftl`).
```

Here is the default order of how the plugin chooses its locale:

1. If sessions are enabled, try to read `__language_code` from the session.
   If it returns a valid locale, it is used.
   If it returns nothing or a non-registered locale, move on to step 2.
2. Try to read from `ctx.from.language_code`.
   If it returns a valid locale, it is used.
   If it returns nothing or a non-registered locale, move on to step 3.

   > Note that `ctx.from.language_code` is only available if the user has started the bot.
   > That means if the bot sees the user in a group or somewhere without the user previously having started the bot, it won't be able to see `ctx.from.language_code`.
3. Try using the default language configured in the options of `I18n`.
   If it is set to a valid locale, it is used.
   If it isn't specified or set to a non-registered locale, move on to step 4.
4. English (`en`). The plugin itself sets this as the ultimate fallback locale.
   Even though it is a fallback locale, and we recommend having a translation, it is not a requirement.
   If no English locale is provided, move on to step 5.

> 5. If all the above things fail, use `{key}` instead of a translation. We **highly recommend** setting a locale that exists in your translations as `defaultLocale` in i18n options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. If all the above things fail, use `{key}` instead of a translation.
   We **highly recommend** setting a locale that exists in your translations as `defaultLocale` in the `I18n` options.
```

::: tip Locale Negotiation

Locale negotiation happens typically only once during Telegram update processing.
However, you can run `ctx.i18n.renegotiateLocale()` to call the negotiator again and determine the new locale.
It is helpful if the locale changes during single update processing.

:::

Here is an example of `localeNegotiator` where we use `locale` from session instead of `__language_code`.

> In a case like this, you don't have to set `useSession` to `true` in i18n options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a case like this, you don't have to set `useSession` to `true` in the options of `I18n`.
```
or
```suggestion
In a case like this, you don't have to set `useSession` to `true` in the `I18n` options.
```

  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("welcome"));
});

bot.command("cart", async (ctx) => {
  // You can pass placeables as the second object.
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("cart-msg", { items: 10 }));
});
```

Now you can `/start` your bot; it should render the following message:

```:no-line-numbers
Hi there!
```

Now, with the `/cart` command:

```:no-line-numbers
You currently have 10 items in your cart.
```

Try to change the value of the `items` variable to see how the rendered message would change!
Also, check out the Fluent documentation, especially the [placeables documentation](https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/placeables.html).

## Adding Translations

There are three main methods to load translations.

### Loading Locales Using the `directory` Option

The simplest way to add translations to the `I18n` instance is by having all of your translations in a directory and specifying the directory name in the options.

```ts
const i18n = new I18n({
  directory: "locales",
});
```

### Loading Locales From a Directory

This method is the same thing as specifying `directory` in options.
Just put them all in a folder and load them like this:

```ts
const i18n = new I18n();

> await i18n.loadLocalesDir("locales");
> i18n.loadLocalesDirSync("locales 2");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await i18n.loadLocalesDir("locales"); // async version
i18n.loadLocalesDirSync("locales-2"); // sync version
```

```

### Loading a Single Locale

It is also possible to add a single translation to the instance.
You can either specify the file path to the translation using

```ts
const i18n = new I18n();

> await i18n.loadLocale("en", { filePath: "locales/en.ftl" });
> i18n.loadLocaleSync("de", { filePath: "locales/de.ftl" });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await i18n.loadLocale("en", { filePath: "locales/en.ftl" }); // async version
i18n.loadLocaleSync("de", { filePath: "locales/de.ftl" }); // sync version
```

```

or you can directly load the translation data as a string like this:

```ts
const i18n = new I18n();

> await i18n.loadLocale("en", {
>   source: `greeting = Hello { $first_name }!
> language-set = Language has been set to English!`,
> });
> 
> i18n.loadLocaleSync("de", {
>   source: `greeting = Hallo { $first_name }!
> language-set = Die Sprache wurde zu Deutsch geändert!`,
> });

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
await i18n.loadLocale("en", { // async version
  source: `greeting = Hello { $first_name }!
language-set = Language has been set to English!`,
});

i18n.loadLocaleSync("de", { // sync version
  source: `greeting = Hallo { $first_name }!
language-set = Die Sprache wurde zu Deutsch geändert!`,
});
```

```

## Custom Placeables and Functions

These two features are going to help you when translating things.

> Fluent provides both.

Reviewer 2: This sentence somehow does not make much sense to me here. We talk about two features of the plugin, but why do we say that Fluent provides both? Why else would we mention them, if they were not supported, eh?

Author: You're right, it doesn't make any sense. I don't know how it ended up like this. Originally this sentence wasn't there. I'll remove it.

Author: What do you think about replacing that paragraph with this:

This plugin can also help you with writing translations.

Reviewer 2: Works!

```

We can pass a value for the placeable `name`, in the translation context like this:

```ts:no-line-numbers
await ctx.reply(ctx.t("welcome", { name: ctx.from.first_name }))
```

Then the message will be different for each user, with their first names.

#### `first_name`

It is a replacement for `ctx.from.first_name`.
So, you don't need to pass it in the context you need. You can use it directly like this

```fluent:no-line-numbers
greeting = Hi { $first_name }
```

### Functions

Functions are like placeables. But unlike placeables, functions get executed and replaced by the value it returns in the final output.

#### `CTX`

This function can help you to access any properties of the bot context directly from your translations.

```fluent:no-line-numbers
id = Your user ID: { CTX("from.id") }
```

The `CTX("from.id")` will get replaced by `ctx.from.id`.

Optionally, you can pass in a default value as the second argument.
If the value is undefined, the default value is used instead.

```fluent:no-line-numbers
id = Last name: { CTX("from.last_name", "You don't have a last name.") }
```

## Listening for Localized Text

We managed to send localized messages to the user.

> Now let's take a look at how to listen for messages sent by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, let's take a look at how to listen for messages sent by the user.
```

In grammY, we usually use the `bot.hears` handler for listening to incoming messages.
But since we've been talking about internationalization, in this section we will see how to listen for localized incoming messages.

> This feature come in handy when your bot has [custom keyboards](./keyboard.md#custom-keyboards) containing localized text.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This feature comes in handy when your bot has [custom keyboards](./keyboard.md#custom-keyboards) containing localized text.
```

Here is a short example of listening to a localized text message sent using a custom keyboard.
Instead of using `bot.hears` handler, we use `bot.filter` combined with the `hears` middleware provided by this plugin.

```ts
import { hears } from "@grammyjs/i18n";

bot.filter(hears("back-to-menu-btn"), async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply("main-menu-msg");
});

> ```

Reviewer 2: Please provide TS/JS/Deno versions where the import is adjusted so that copying becomes easier.

> The `hears` middleware makes sure that the message the bot is listening for, is written in the same locale of the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `hears` helper function allows your bot to listen for a message that is written in the locale of the user.
```

   If it isn't specified or set to a non-registered locale, move on to step 4.
4. Try using English (`en`).
   The plugin itself sets this as the ultimate fallback locale.
   Even though it is a fallback locale, and we recommend having a translation, it is not a requirement.
   If no English locale is provided, move on to step 5.
5. If all the above things fail, use `{key}` instead of a translation.
   We **highly recommend** setting a locale that exists in your translations as `defaultLocale` in the `I18n` options.

::: tip Locale Negotiation

Locale negotiation happens typically only once during Telegram update processing.
However, you can run `ctx.i18n.renegotiateLocale()` to call the negotiator again and determine the new locale.
It is helpful if the locale changes during single update processing.

:::

Here is an example of `localeNegotiator` where we use `locale` from session instead of `__language_code`.
In a case like this, you don't have to set `useSession` to `true` in the options of `I18n`.

<CodeGroup>
 <CodeGroupItem title="TypeScript">

```ts
function myLocaleNegotiator(ctx: MyContext) {
  return ctx.session.locale ?? ctx.from?.language_code ?? "en";
}

> const i18n = new I18n({

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
const i18n = new I18n<MyContext>({
```

>   localeNegotiator: myLocaleNegotiator,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  localeNegotiator: (ctx) => {
    return ctx.session.locale ?? ctx.from?.language_code ?? "en";
  },
```
Avoid explicitly setting Context type in function?

There are more things to localize than the language.
You can also account for cultural differences or other standards, such as the date and time formats.
Here are a few more examples of things that are represented differently across the globe:

1. Dates
2. Times
3. Numbers
4. Units
5. Pluralization
6. Genders
7. Hyphenation
8. Capitalization
9. Alignment
10. Symbols and icons
11. Sorting

… and [a lot more](https://youtu.be/0j74jcxSunY).

All of these things collectively define the _locale_ of a user.
Locales often get two-letter codes, such as `en` for English, `de` for German, and so on.
If you want to find the code for your locale, check out [this list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag#List_of_common_primary_language_subtags).

### What Is Internationalization?

In a nutshell, internationalization means writing code that can adjust to a user's locale.
In other words, internationalization is what enables localization (see [above](#what-is-localization)).
This means that while your bot fundamentally works the same way for everybody, the exact messages it sends vary from user to user, so the bot can speak different languages.

> You are doing internationalization if you don't hard-code the texts your bot sends but instead read them from a file dynamically.
> You are doing internationalization if you don't hard-code how dates and times are represented, and instead use a library that adjusts these values according to different standards.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You are doing internationalization if:

1. you don't hard-code the texts your bot sends but instead read them from a file dynamically.
2. you don't hard-code how dates and times are represented, and instead use a library that adjusts these values according to different standards.

```

Author: I didn't write this part. So I'm not sure if this is okay or not. So, @KnorpelSenf.

Reviewer 2: I did not use a list because those are examples. A list looks like a comprehensive overview of all the possible ways to do i18n. This would be misleading.

However, we can of course elaborate that those are examples, and make it clear that there are a lot more things connected to i18n than just those two things.

Reviewer 5: That makes sense. I wish I could abbreviate both sentences, because as I was doing the translation I noticed that the sentences were too long. However, it wasn't a big deal.

:::

## Custom Locale Negotiation

You can use the option `localeNegotiator` to specify a custom locale negotiator.
This option is helpful if you want to select the locale based on external sources (such as databases) or in other situations where you want to control which locale is used.

Here is the default order of how the plugin chooses its locale:

1. If sessions are enabled, try to read `__language_code` from the session.
   If it returns a valid locale, it is used.
   If it returns nothing or a non-registered locale, move on to step 2.
2. Try to read from `ctx.from.language_code`.
   If it returns a valid locale, it is used.
   If it returns nothing or a non-registered locale, move on to step 3.

   > Note that `ctx.from.language_code` is only available if the user has started the bot.
   > That means if the bot sees the user in a group or somewhere without the user previously having started the bot, it won't be able to see `ctx.from.language_code`.

3. Try using the default language configured in the options of `I18n`.
   If it is set to a valid locale, it is used.
   If it isn't specified or set to a non-registered locale, move on to step 4.

> 4. English (`en`). The plugin itself sets this as the ultimate fallback locale.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
4. Use English (`en`). The plugin itself sets this as the ultimate fallback locale.
```

```

## Custom Placeables and Functions

This plugin can also help you with writing translations.

[Placeables](https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/placeables.html) and [Functions](https://projectfluent.org/fluent/guide/functions.html) are two core features of the Fluent localization system.
This plugin injects some placeables and functions into your translation context and reduces your work of managing the translation context.

### Placeables

Placeables are used to inject data into a translation string.
For example, in a welcome message, you may use the user's name to greet them.
But you can't have messages for each user's name in your translations.
Instead, you can pass their name in the translation context, and the message will change according to the receiver.

Here is what you would do in `en.ftl`:

```fluent:no-line-numbers
welcome = Hi there, { $name }!
```

We can pass a value for the placeable `name`, in the translation context like this:

```ts:no-line-numbers
await ctx.reply(ctx.t("welcome", { name: ctx.from.first_name }))
```

Then the message will be different for each user, with their first names.

#### `first_name`

It is a replacement for `ctx.from.first_name`.

> So, you don't need to pass it in the context you need. You can use it directly like this

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
So, you don't need to pass it in the context you need.
You can use it directly like this
```

```fluent:no-line-numbers
greeting = Hi { $first_name }
```

### Functions

> Functions are like placeables. But unlike placeables, functions get executed and replaced by the value it returns in the final output.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Functions are like placeables.
But unlike placeables, functions get executed and replaced by the value it returns in the final output.
```

bot.use(i18n);

// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with `t` or `translate`.
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start-msg"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="JavaScript">

```js
const { Bot } = require("grammy");
const { I18n } = require("@grammyjs/i18n");

// Create a bot as you normally would.
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

// Create an `I18n` instance.
// Continue reading to find out how to configure the instance.
const i18n = new I18n({
  defaultLocale: "en", // see below for more information

  // Load all translation files from locales/.
  directory: "locales",
});

// Finally, register the i18n instance in the bot,
// so the messages get translated on their way!
bot.use(i18n);

// Everything is set up now.
// You can access translations with `t` or `translate`.
bot.command("start", async (ctx) => {
  await ctx.reply(ctx.t("start-msg"));
});
```

</CodeGroupItem>
 <CodeGroupItem title="Deno">

```ts
import { Bot, Context } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy/mod.ts";
import { I18n, I18nFlavor } from "https://deno.land/x/grammy_i18n/mod.ts";

> // For TypeScript and auto-completion support,
> // extend the context with I18n's flavor:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
// For full TypeScript support and proper auto-completion
// extend the Context with I18n's Context Flavor.
```
Match comment from the TypeScript example (line 162).

Author: The opposite was [suggested](https://github.com/grammyjs/website/pull/431#discussion_r918861264) a while ago. And I only applied it on Deno's part. My bad. I'll make everything the same.

The internationalization plugin makes your bot speak multiple languages.

> ::: tip Not to be confused

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::: tip Not to Be Confused
```

start = Hi, how can I /help you?
help = 
    Send me some text and I can make it bold for you.
    You can change my language using the /language command.
```

`de.ftl`

```fluent
start = Hallo, wie kann ich dir helfen? /help
help = 
    Schick eine Textnachricht, die ich für dich fett schreiben soll.
    Du kannst mit dem Befehl /language die Spache ändern.
```

> Using the translations in your bot:

Reviewer 3: I already explained it I think before: For me it feels like this is written like a tutorial with these sentences, but its a doc, it should be less.

> Using the translations in your bot:

Reviewer 2: You are using incomplete sentences. If anything, this makes it less formal, not more.

Also, please remember that it does not really matter if we call this website a documentation or a tutorial or a guide or a supporting resource or a bot knowledge platform. If the content is useful and easy to digest, it is good. Being formal is not a measure of quality. Being helpful is.

> Using the translations in your bot:

Reviewer 3: its descriptive, not incomplete in this sentence
